---
title: MapDB 4 news
layout: comments
tags: [4.0, status]
---

I started working again on MapDB4 so I would like to
outline my goals for upcoming release. 

 I do not have best track record in delivering releases.  
A similar update  was made almost two years ago, and MapDB 4
has been under development for a long time.

Well life happens, hopefully this time it will happen in a right direction. 
Despite long neglect this project is still in active use, 
and nobody made viable alternative. It deserves good shot.

TL;DR
--------

MapDB right now does not have stable well-supported version. 
I want to simplify internals and release beta version in March 2021.
It will contain features similar to MapDB 1, 
but should have more stable and predictable performance.



Non-technical changes 
----------------

Some changes in project organization:

- MapDB logo is a little rocket. In 2012 it was something light 
and fast. Today rockets are too common, maybe even a bit controversial.
Time to rebrand into [Map<D,B>](https://logocaster.com/logo-design/Map%26lt%3BD%2CB%26gt%3B?seed=601469432&compoundIndex=).  
 
- MapDB is in single repo and single jar. It is heading towards 20MB jar and dependency hell. 
  So it will split into smaller `mapdb-core` and fragments like `mapdb-btreemap`, `mapdb-guava` and so on.    
  Old jar `org.mapdb-mapdb` will serve as an umbrella to fetch all dependencies. 
  
- Github MapDB repos are moving under [new organization](https://github.com/mapdb). 
  I will keep full control, but it will allow easier contributions.  
  
- No more documentation. I am horrible at writing docs, so I officially give up. From now on
  there will be code examples, [katas](https://github.com/eclipse/eclipse-collections-kata), 
  Youtube screencast and probably some javadoc. Goal is to make it more code centric, I find it more effective. 
  
- MapDB Labs LLC. I run MapDB as a side project with my self-employed consulting business. 
  That comes with many limitations, it is time to form a company. 
  
What is not changing:

- License, it will remain under Apache 2 with no dual licensing, proprietary parts or other hooks. 
I believe it is most effective business model.
  

TODO data input to stream, byte[], bytebuffer...
